Another category to consider
is the length of the play you’re writing.
Whether it’s a one-act,
short play, full-length, or five acts
Five acts is the longest
I think there is,
or cycles of plays
that’s really long.
It all depends
on the broadness and scope
of the idea you want to develop.
The one-act play,
in its strictest form,
was developed during
the enlightenment period in Europe
wherein time, space,
and action were unified.
This means the moment
the play starts
it’s like we caught the characters
in the act of doing
something ‘til the end.
The illusion of this
is that it all happened
under 45 minutes or within an hour.
And we caught
the action red-handedly.
There’s no change in time,
no change in setting.
That’s it.
That’s what we call
a one-act play.
Chekhov’s five-act plays
or three-act plays are like that.
The scenes don’t change
in the first act.
When it changes,
the next act comes up
and it’s also one scene.
It would’ve been
very conducive
if the play was realistic.
Now, if the length
is either one-act or full length,
it will depend on how
you want to tell the story.
There are stories
that are really long
and there are some
that are really short.
But aside from that,
it will still depend
on what you want to say.
It will really just depend
on how broad and long your story is.
When the story is long,
the things you want to say increases.
For example,
it could start in the establishment
of an organization or company
and then the obstacles it faced.
So it might have collapsed,
re-established, and so on.
It's like one turn of events
creates another problem,
so the problem intensifies
until you're able to prove the strength
and skill of the characters
in order to triumph over
whatever it is they're fighting for.
But if you can do it
in the blink of an eye,
that's a one-act play
because that's only
what you have to say.
There are also cycles of plays.
It's called a play cycle,
meaning five plays in one.
The experience is not complete
if you don't get to see all five plays.
Like a novel in four parts
or a saga, the Rosales saga
are five completely different novels
but you know, taken as one.
You'll see the whole
landscape of Rosales, Pangasinan.
Something like that.
So plays can go on
and on and on.
Depending on how all the ideas
still relate and connect to each other in the end
but they can also be
one spurt of idea and still be impactful.
So I’m not giving any...
I don't have a preference
on whether you should do
one-act or full-length.
It depends.
The important thing is the idea.
Most of the one-act ideas,
most of them are simple.
As if it doesn’t really merit
or deserve being written as a play.
Maybe it’s better
written as an article.
Or as a personal essay,
or a shoutout on Twitter.
Something like that,
a status or something.
Rather than a play that needs
actors, directors, stage, sets.
If that’s all you have to show,
I already saw the viral video of Jollibee.
That’s more expensive
because it went viral.
Still, the point is
what do you want to say?
But of course,
as writers, I encourage you
to write full-length plays,
but I’m not saying that all
full-length plays are deeper than one-acts.
Not necessarily.
They can go on and on and on
and still be fluff.
But I think it’s a good exercise for you
to develop your ideas
on a grander scale.
- Can you start with one-act,
then when it’s done you can expand it,
using that one-act as a full-length?
That’s possible.
But that’s no guarantee.
That’s what happened
to “Paano Ako Naging Leading Lady.”
It was a one-act play,
and it became a full-blown musical.
There are also one-act plays
that became films.
So it achieved a full-length status,
I mean relatively.
For example “Imbisibol”,
it was a one-act play.
But when it was
translated into film
it became a presentation of a milieu.
Something like that,
so it’s possible.
- But that’s expanding
on the same topic? Or...?
Yes,
but again, like I said, it’s no guarantee
that it’ll be successful aesthetically
- Will you be able to help us?
In developing a full-length?
I mean, do you have anything to share,
not necessarily right now,
some exercises or strategies
on how to develop or...
or expand,
Or does it really start
with what you want to say,
and it has to be
something that’s grand and...?
It’s not just the grandness.
But the...
It’s also an exercise
and skill in developing ideas.
Because in a one-act,
like what I said,
you still follow one path
which is still an effort to do.
Especially when it’s a bit sensitive
or the topic is controversial,
but if it’s like “That’s all I have
to say about this,”
that’s what’ll happen.
I guess it’s the same example as
will you write a short story
or will you write a novel?
That the effort will be
much more daunting.
The project will be
much more daunting if it’s a novel.
Because you can come up
with more related ideas.
You can put subplots, parallel plots
to elaborate more on the ideas.
It could be the same idea
as your first one-act play,
it only means that when you’re
developing a full-length,
you’re developing
the idea much more.
Subjecting it
to more complex contexts, right?
One of the tendencies,
especially if you’re used
to writing one-act plays,
when making a full-length,
is to create three one-acts.
It becomes something
like a trilogy of characters.
It becomes something like that, right?
Like comparing three lives
but actually there are
three one-act plays.
You can do it that way,
but it’s also possible
that you followed all of it.
So I guess...
since many of the writers
are joining Virgin Labfest,
since that’s the only venue,
it would be a good exercise
for writers like you to push for it,
to develop the ideas.
- So usually you tend
to make a big one-act…
that’s why one-acts
were more exciting before.
Yes, because it loses something like...
It’s like you made an espresso,
but you just added water so it’s like...
- The effect of the
(espresso) shot is gone--
- The caffeine's effect is lost
when it becomes a full-length.
That’s true.
The easier way
is to treat it as telenovela, right?
Like films that were
turned into telenovelas, right?
The way they expand it,
it’s really like adding water.
So the story becomes diluted, not--
and lengthy, nothing more.
But that’s not what
we want to happen.
We don't want
to just make it longer.
We also want
to make it profound.